MNIST PRIVACY-PRESERVING FEDERATED LEARNING
Detailed implementation guide and paper comparison

PROJECT FILES
------------
main.py        The training experiment: data preparation, CNN, clients,
               quantization, Paillier encryption, aggregation, evaluation,
               and CSV metrics.
download.py    Loads/checks the MNIST dataset in the TensorFlow/Keras cache.
requirements.txt  Python package dependencies.
test_main.py   Focused tests for non-IID partitioning, quantization, and
               encrypted averaging.
README.md      Short installation and run instructions.
workflow.png  Overview of the implemented execution flow.
RP PPFRL mohit.pdf
               The paper used as a reference.

Lines below refer to main.py unless another filename is explicitly given.
Line references describe the source as delivered with this report.


1. WHAT THE PROGRAM DOES, IN SIMPLE WORDS
------------------------------------------
The program trains one shared handwritten-digit classifier without collecting
all client images into one training pool. It divides MNIST training examples
among three simulated clients. Each client starts a round with the same current
global model, trains on its own examples, and calculates how much its model
weights changed. The changes are clipped and converted to small signed integer
values. Each client's integer update is packed and encrypted with Paillier.

The server adds encrypted client updates without first decrypting each client's
individual update. In this single-computer simulation, the server then decrypts
the combined values, averages them, applies the average change to the global
model, tests the model on the MNIST test set, and starts the next round. The
program records per-round measurements in a CSV file.

This is a research/learning implementation, not a production privacy system.
The clients, server, and decryption key all run in the same process. The
configured client delays are simulated values, not real network or training
completion times.


2. FLOW DIAGRAM
---------------
Open workflow.png for a visual overview. In words, the flow is:

MNIST -> normalize and split into client shards -> initialize global CNN ->
each round: send current global weights to eligible clients -> local training
-> compute client weight changes -> clip and 8-bit quantize -> pack and
Paillier-encrypt -> add encrypted updates -> decrypt and average the aggregate
-> update global model -> test and record metrics -> next round -> CSV results.


3. DATA: HOW THE NON-IID SPLIT IS MADE
-------------------------------------
The full Keras MNIST training set has 60,000 labeled examples. Images are
normalized to values from 0 to 1 and given a single grayscale channel. Test
images and labels are kept separately for evaluation. This loading and
preprocessing is in main.py lines 178-187.

The split function is partition_non_iid in main.py lines 34-53:

  1. There are three clients (main.py line 18).
  2. The function sorts the training-example indices by their digit label
     (line 47). This brings similar digits together in the sorted list.
  3. It divides that sorted list into 30 consecutive pieces: 10 shards per
     client (lines 40 and 48). With all 60,000 training examples, each shard
     has 2,000 examples and each client receives 10 shards, or 20,000
     examples.
  4. It shuffles the 30 shards using the supplied random seed (line 49).
  5. It assigns every third shard to each client (lines 50-52). The clients
     each receive the same number of examples, but the digit mix in their
     shards can differ. This is label-skewed/non-IID partitioning.

This is not a guarantee that each client has only one or two digit classes.
The three shards for each digit are shuffled across clients, so clients may
receive different amounts of each digit. It is a reproducible label-skew
simulation, not a fully specified or measured statistical distribution.
The seed is set in main.py lines 203-205.

For a quick run, --max-train-samples first randomly selects a smaller subset
of the training set before partitioning (main.py lines 189-197). It does not
shrink the MNIST test set.

PAPER SPLIT CAVEAT: The paper is inconsistent about this choice. Its evaluation
setup (Section 6.1, printed page 11) says it uses non-IID training data, but
the following description says IID partitioning shuffles data and divides it
evenly among three clients. This implementation chooses label-skewed non-IID
data, following the evaluation setup statement. Its exact shard recipe is an
implementation choice; it is not stated as the paper's exact split algorithm.


4. MODEL AND LOCAL CLIENT TRAINING
----------------------------------
The CNN is defined and compiled by create_model in main.py lines 157-175. It
has two convolution/max-pooling stages, a 32-unit dense layer, and a 10-unit
digit output. It uses SGD at learning rate 0.01, sparse categorical
cross-entropy, and accuracy.

At the start of each round, the global model's weights are copied
(main.py lines 229-233). For each simulated client whose configured delay is
not greater than the round timer, the program creates a fresh CNN and loads
those same global weights (lines 235-243). That client then trains the CNN
only on its own local images and labels (lines 243-250). The image data itself
does not get sent to the server.

After local training, the client computes the difference between its trained
weights and the round's starting global weights (main.py lines 251-259). This
difference is called a model update or model delta. The client update is
quantized and marked as received (line 260-261).

All accepted clients start the round from the same global model. Their updates
are averaged with equal client weight, not weighted by each client's number
of examples. The full default split is equal-sized, but using a small subset
can make client sizes differ by a few examples. The current aggregation still
weights clients equally in that case.

The default local epoch count is 1 (main.py line 351), to make an initial run
more practical on a CPU. The paper's Table 5 appears to list 20 local epochs,
20 federated rounds, three clients, batch size 32, learning rate 0.01,
quantization bits 8, initial timer 10, and timer increment 5. The code defaults
to 20 rounds, batch size 32, learning rate 0.01, 8-bit quantization, timer 10,
and timer increment 5 (main.py lines 350-356), but it does NOT default to the
paper's 20 local epochs. Pass --local-epochs 20 to use that apparent paper
setting. The paper's CNN architecture is not specified well enough to claim
that this implementation's layer sizes are an exact reproduction.


5. CLIENT DELAYS AND ASYNCHRONOUS BEHAVIOR
------------------------------------------
The initial timer is 10 seconds by default and rises by 5 after each round
(main.py lines 355-356 and 332). The default simulated client delays are 2,
6, and 12 (main.py lines 357-362). A client is eligible when its configured
delay is no greater than the current timer (lines 235-240).

With those defaults, the first round accepts the clients with delays 2 and 6,
but drops the client with delay 12. After the timer increases, the second
round's 15-second deadline accepts all three; later deadlines also accept
them. If no client meets a round deadline, training stops with an explicit
error (main.py lines 263-267).

IMPORTANT: This is an asynchronous/straggler simulation, not a distributed
asynchronous implementation. The delay numbers are eligibility thresholds:
the code does not actually sleep for those delays, start client workers in
parallel, or receive network messages over time. Eligible clients' training
is executed sequentially by one Python process inside the loop. It models
which updates arrive before a deadline; it does not measure real network
latency or reproduce actual parallel scheduling.


6. HOW UPDATES MOVE THROUGH FEDERATED LEARNING
----------------------------------------------
Federated learning here means the raw training images stay in the local
training step, while model changes, rather than images, are used to update the
shared model.

Update preparation:
  - A client subtracts the starting global weights from its trained local
    weights (main.py lines 251-260).
  - quantize_update clips each delta value to [-clip_value, +clip_value],
    scales it, and rounds it to one of 255 signed integer values from -127
    through +127 (main.py lines 23-31). The default clip value is 1.0
    (line 354). Clipping limits large values; quantization reduces precision.

Encryption and encrypted aggregation:
  - The program makes a fresh Paillier key pair for each round
    (main.py lines 269-272).
  - encrypt_packed_updates validates the quantized values, packs several
    integer values into each plaintext integer, encrypts each client's packed
    value, and adds the ciphertexts together (main.py lines 56-109).
    Paillier's additive property allows those ciphertext additions without
    decrypting each client's individual update.
  - The plaintext packing uses a bit width chosen to prevent carries between
    adjacent packed values when the participating clients' values are summed
    (main.py lines 86-107). The unit test checks the decoded encrypted average.

Aggregate and global model:
  - decrypt_packed_average decrypts each encrypted sum and extracts the
    individual summed slots, then divides by the number of accepted clients
    (main.py lines 112-154).
  - run_experiment converts the integer average back to a floating-point
    update, adds it to the global weights, and installs the new weights
    (main.py lines 278-299).
  - This implementation decrypts at the simulated server to apply the
    aggregate. It does not transmit an encrypted aggregate back to clients
    for client-side decryption.

The implementation uses standard additive Paillier from the phe package.
It does NOT implement the paper's custom/improved Paillier equations or
threshold decryption. The paper's key-sharing/decryption descriptions and
equations are not complete enough to safely treat the single-process key
handling here as an exact cryptographic reproduction.


7. TESTING, OUTPUT METRICS, AND RUN COMMANDS
--------------------------------------------
After each round, main.py evaluates the global model against all 10,000 MNIST
test examples (lines 301-303). It records accuracy, loss, accepted client
count, timer, measured key-generation/encryption time, measured aggregate
decryption time, round wall-clock duration, an estimated communication byte
count, key length, and quantization precision (lines 304-322). It prints a
round summary (lines 323-330) and writes the rows to CSV (lines 334-341).
The default CSV path is results/mnist_ppfrl_results.csv (main.py line 366).

Communication bytes are an estimate computed from the number of packed
ciphertexts and their approximate size, multiplied by accepted clients plus
one (main.py lines 304-308). This code does not send or capture network
packets. Consequently this estimate is not a measured network transfer and
should not be compared directly to a real network traffic measurement.

Quick smoke run:
  python main.py --rounds 1 --max-train-samples 90 --client-delays 0 0 0 --initial-timer 0

Full default run (may take a long time on CPU):
  python main.py

Closer local-epoch setting from paper Table 5:
  python main.py --local-epochs 20

Dependencies and data preparation:
  python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
  python download.py

Focused checks:
  python -m unittest test_main.py

The source tests are in test_main.py: they check 8-bit clipping/quantization,
Paillier packed encrypted averaging, rejection of overflow-range inputs, and
complete/reproducible non-IID shard assignment.


8. RESULTS: IMPLEMENTATION VERSUS PAPER
---------------------------------------
PAPER-REPORTED MNIST RESULT
  The paper reports an average MNIST test accuracy of 94.77% for its
  experiments (Section 6.2.1, printed page 11). It describes 20 federated
  rounds using a CNN and three clients. Its Table 5 appears to specify 20
  local epochs, batch size 32, learning rate 0.01, 8-bit quantization, and
  timer parameters 10 and 5.

  For communication, the paper later gives totals over 20 iterations of
  929 GB for the baseline MNIST setting and 87 GB for its proposed setting
  (Section 6.2.3, printed page 12-13). Taken literally, those figures imply
  about a 90.6% lower proposed total (1 - 87/929).

  The abstract associates a 12.46% reduction with MNIST and CIFAR-10 and
  14.72% with Fashion-MNIST when discussing total training time and
  communication cost, but it does not clearly separate those percentages by
  metric. The 12.46% headline also does not match the 929-to-87 GB totals as
  a communication reduction. Treat these as paper-reported claims with an
  internal reporting ambiguity, not as numbers reproduced by this code.

IMPLEMENTATION RESULT ACTUALLY MEASURED
  The final smoke run used only 90 training examples, one local epoch, one
  round, a zero-second simulated deadline, and zero delay for all three
  clients. It completed encryption and aggregation, accepted all three
  clients, and reported test accuracy about 11.34% and loss about 2.308 on
  the 10,000-image test set. This tiny one-round smoke-test result is only
  evidence that the pipeline runs. It is not a meaningful trained-model
  score and is not comparable to the paper's 94.77%.

  A separate smoke run with 600 training examples also completed a round and
  reported 12.50% test accuracy. It is likewise only a pipeline check.

  The complete default 20-round run on all 60,000 MNIST training images was
  started but took too long on this native-Windows, CPU-only TensorFlow
  environment and was stopped. Therefore there is currently NO measured
  full-run accuracy, training-time comparison, or comparable end-to-end
  communication result for this implementation. The code and report do not
  claim that this implementation achieves the paper's accuracy or speedup.

SIDE-BY-SIDE SUMMARY
  Measure                  Paper                        Current implementation
  -----------------------  ---------------------------  ---------------------------
  Dataset                  MNIST among others           MNIST only
  Clients                  3                            3 simulated clients
  Data distribution        Says non-IID, but also       Label-sorted 30-shard
                           describes IID partitioning   non-IID assignment
  Model                    CNN                          CNN; exact layers chosen here
  Federated rounds         20                           Default 20
  Local epochs             Table appears to say 20      Default 1; configurable to 20
  Batch size               32                           32
  Learning rate            0.01                         0.01
  Quantization             8 bit                        Signed 8-bit update values
  Encryption               Improved Paillier            Standard additive Paillier
  Asynchronous timing      Adaptive timer               Simulated delay/deadline gate;
                                                        clients actually run sequentially
  MNIST accuracy           94.77% reported              No full-run result measured
  Smoke accuracy           Not comparable               11.34% on 90 examples/1 round
  MNIST traffic            929 GB baseline;             Estimate formula in CSV;
                           87 GB proposed (paper)        no real network transfer

BOTTOM LINE
  The core experimental flow has been implemented and tested on small smoke
  runs, including non-IID client partitions and actual Paillier encryption
  and homomorphic ciphertext addition. It is a transparent, runnable
  paper-inspired prototype. It is not a completed numerical reproduction of
  the paper: its full training result has not been measured; its client
  schedule is simulated; it uses a chosen CNN architecture; its default local
  epoch count differs from the paper's apparent setting; and it uses standard
  rather than the paper's claimed improved Paillier variant.
